+++
categories = ["Batteries", "Li Ion Batteries    ", "SEM-EDS", "XRD", "GCMS", "FTIR "]
date = ""
draft = true
featured_image = ""
title = "Lithium Ion Battery Analysis"

+++
**Gideon Analytical Laboratories** received 18650[ Lithium-ion](https://www.energy.gov/eere/articles/how-does-lithium-ion-battery-work "Lithium Ion Battery") cells for evaluation. A Lithium-Ion battery is a type of rechargeable battery in which lithium ions move from the negative electrode to the positive electrode during discharge and back when charging. Lithium-ion batteries use an intercalated lithium compound on the cathode and carbon on the anode. These materials allow the lithium ions to be housed in the crystal structure as the intercalation of the lithium is occurring during charging and discharging. These types of batteries are galvanic in nature. The electrolyte, which allows for ionic movement, and the two electrodes (commonly copper and aluminum) are the constituent components of a lithium-ion battery cell. As lithium ions move from cathode to anode during charging, free electrons are released that flow from the collector to the load being powered.

During incoming inspection or qualification, all the raw materials must be analyzed for contaminates and reproducibility in the product to ensure long term reliability. This includes the seals, the separator, the cathode and anode foil, the intercalation materials, and the electrolyte. These materials must be analyzed with different instruments because of their various properties.

The cells must be deconstructed and analyzed immediately. The organic components, which include the cathode/anode discs, separators, and cell sealers, were removed and analyzed via [FTIR](https://gideonlabs.com/analytical-services/fourier-transform-infra-red-spectroscopy/ "FTIR"). The spectra, image 1, acquired from the anode/cathode discs resembled that of a propylene-ethylene copolymer. The spectra acquired from the separators also resembled that of the propylene-ethylene copolymer. The separator spectra also included some hydrated inorganic compounds resembling aluminum oxide. The spectrum (image 2) acquired from the cell sealers resembled either polypropylene or propylene-ethylene copolymer. Most of these separators are dual-layered.

[Scanning Electron Microscopy -Energy Dispersive Spectrometry (SEM-EDS)](https://gideonlabs.com/analytical-services/scanning-electron-microscopy/ "SEM-EDS") was used to examine the anode (image 4) and cathode (image 3) morphology as well as the permeable structure of the separator (image 5) and reveal how the lithium can migrate without causing a short. Micrographs show each electrodes topography, while the EDS analysis reveals the highest to lowest elemental concentrations on the electrode. EDS scan (image 6) on the anode had carbon as the major concentration with other elements composing the binder, the foil, and low-level additives. The carbon will have a distinct structure to allow the intercalation of the lithium-ion with minimal swelling to the lattice structure of the graphite. The anode concentrations are revealed in table 1. The same techniques are used for the cathode analysis. Some of these elements are going to be the non-coordinating anion salts, which are composed of elements below the detection limit and/or below the atomic number the EDS can analyze. These might include lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF), lithium tetrafluoroborate (LiBF), [lithium triflate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithium_triflate "Lithium triflate") (LiCF) or [Lithium Phosphorus Sulfide (LPS) – Li3PS4](https://www.neicorporation.com/products/batteries/solid-state-electrolyte/custom/ "Materials"). The lithium and boron in all cases will not be detected using EDS.

The medium used in the cell to transport lithium ions must be analyzed using [gas chromatograph-mass spectrometry (GCMS](https://gideonlabs.com/analytical-services/gcms/ "GCMS")). These electrolytes are composed of varying percentages of carbonate compounds. As the industry has changed, to smaller volume weights of electrolyte, the techniques used to determine the concentration also changes. Two methods were utilized for this analysis, headspace GCMS, and direct injection GCMS. The headspace electrolyte analysis revealed the major components as dimethyl carbonate, propylene carbonate, and ethylene carbonate. The minor components included acetic and formic acids along with vinyl and fluoroethyl carbonate, both of which are electrode stabilizers for electrolytic solutions. The direct injection GCMS showed ethylene, dimethyl, propylene, fluoroethylene, and vinyl carbonates. There is a difference between medium (solvent used for ion transportation) and the solute (the compound dissolved in the solvent, which does the intercalating). Both these are combined and often referred to as the electrolyte. The [TIC (total ion chromatogram)](TIC (total ion chromatogram)  "TIC of GCMS") is shown in image 7. This is the separation of the compounds by molecular weight using the MS intensities all summed up in one chromatogram. The results are in table 2.

[X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometry (XRF)](https://gideonlabs.com/analytical-services/x-ray-fluorescence-spectrometry/ "XRF Explanation") analysis was used on the electrodes to acquire elemental quantitative data and weight percentage. This technique must be performed in conjunction with [X-ray diffraction (XRD)](https://gideonlabs.com/analytical-services/x-ray-diffraction/ "XRD Expalnation") on the cathode to determine if the phase is present in quantities approaching the limits of detection. The cathodes were each scanned and analyzed; it was found that Ni, Co, and Mn, had the highest weight percentage, Al was minimal, P, S, Si, and C were less than 1% weight. This analysis agrees with the results found using XRD to match the phase found. The anode was also scanned (image 9) and analyzed; it was found that Cu had the highest weight percentage, a result of the beam penetrating the carbon to the foil level. The remainder of the elements were below 1%.

To ascertain what materials are used on the aluminum and copper foils for intercalation, the substances had to be analyzed with XRD. [Intercalation materials](https://www.targray.com/li-ion-battery/cathode-materials "Materials used to make Ion batteries.") are interstitial compounds in which ions can occupy the interplanar sites of the crystal structure. There are two types: ionic and covalent compounds, lithium graphite and graphite oxide, respectfully, are examples. In image 10, the two compounds on both the cathode and anode are given in one spectrum of intensity vs. two-theta values. The red peaks were identified with graphite, which has a hexagonal structure. If carbon is used as the anode, it must be the hexagonal form to maximize the intercalation. The blue peaks are identified as [Lithium Cobalt Manganese Nickel Oxide](https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/aldrich/725110?lang=en&region=US&gclid=Cj0KCQjwpLfzBRCRARIsAHuj6qUMvVnt05KF7Q--hkLn-LZNIG6EeCu7JDwlqvGeFzuycMnSTbJo-LQaAnaOEALw_wcB  "Material used for the cathode"), also a hexagonal structure. These phases were determined using the [ICDD/ICSD](http://www.icdd.com/ "International Center for diffraction Data") diffraction database.

There are other aspects to the analysis not covered in this brief overview; however, enough information is given to demonstrate we have analyzed these many times and in great detail. We do this for the space program, battery companies, communication companies, cell phone companies, military suppliers, etc. and we can do it for you too. And with that in mind, make Gideon your battery evaluation company and failure analysis company.

Call **Gideon Analytical Laboratories** with electronic component failures, printed circuit board failures, chemical analysis, electronic design debug, component selection, evaluations, or quality control needs. We have the flexibility and know-how to meet your needs, whatever they may be.

Give us a call **(845) 255-5356.**

Feel free to link to this page for reference.